You're looking at the demographic breakdown
of China and India's populations.
In 1990, both countries' demographics resembled a pyramid,
which meant that there were far more young people being born
than there were old people.
But fast forward to projections for 2050,
and you'll notice a dramatic change.
The Chinese pyramid narrows to resemble a shape more
like a funnel.
For more than two centuries,
China has had the largest population in the world.
This year, the UN said India will take its place.
India's population is expected to keep growing
for the next four decades,
peaking at nearly 1.7 billion in 2063.
China's population is projected to shrink rapidly.
By the start of the next century,
India's population is expected to be double that of China's.
All the science point
to a very challenging future for China demographically.
Here's why this shift marks a watershed moment
for both nations,
and what the change could mean for the global economy.
This year, China announced
its first population decline since 1961.
In 2020, China's fertility rate or the number
of children a woman has over her lifetime came in at 1.3,
which is one of the lowest in the world.
The roots of China's demographic crisis can be found
in its one child policy.
The policy was designed to keep birth low
so that China would have the opportunity
to grow its economy.
It turns out, in reality,
the one child policy has far more long-lasting impacts
than policymakers intended.
In a way, it worked too well.
Starting in 1980,
most Chinese couples were strictly limited to one child.
Despite reversing the one child policy in 2016,
China's fertility rate has continued to decline.
The replacement rate needed
to keep a population stable is 2.1.
Meaning that a woman would need
to give birth to at least two children
to keep the population stable
and essentially, replace the parents.
With a fertility rate of 2.0,
India's fertility rate is slightly lower
than the replacement rate.
The reason why India's population
is projected to keep growing
for several more decades is because India, unlike China,
still has a very large group of women
of reproductive age that's very different from China.
In China, the one child policy
produced a dramatic gender imbalance
that originated in strong cultural
and social preferences for male children.
In 2021, the number of marriage registrations plummeted
to 7.6 million,
the lowest since the government started keeping records
in the mid-1980s.
The global economy has grown to rely on China's vast pool
of factory workers for manufactured goods
and its consumers represent a growing market
for Western made cars and luxury goods.
A declining Chinese population would mean
that there will be fewer workers to make products
that are exported to other countries
and there will be fewer consumers,
especially younger consumers
to buy goods from other countries.
In the coming decades,
demographers expect China will face a huge worker
to retiree gap.
In 2020, 14% of China's population was over 64 years old.
While in India, just 7% of people were over 64.
By 2070, nearly 59% of people
in China will be over the age of 64.
While in India, only 30%
of the population will be in the same age bracket.
A larger group of retirees will mean
that younger Chinese people will have a bigger
of a burden to support the elderly.
That's especially true in the rural areas.
In some ways,
India looks like China did 30 years ago.
It has a rapidly expanding working age population
with 610 million people under age 25
and relatively few older people to care for.
India's rising population means it's likely
to keep its economy growing, buy more of the world's goods
and play a bigger role in global affairs.
But India's rise isn't assured.
India's problem now is all about jobs.
Yes, it does have a large working age population
but at the same time,
it is struggling to create jobs for its young people.
India is primarily a rural nation
and still lags behind China in urbanization.
Unlike China, where millions of migrant laborers move
to cities to work in factories, many Indians
are reluctant to leave their hometowns.
India also significantly lags behind China
in terms of female labor participation.
India's cultural norms have meant that families
who can afford to keep their daughters
and wives at home prefer to do so.
When Mao took power, he really pushed the idea
that women is equal to men.
For a long time,
China's women labor participation rate has been very high
and for India, that seem to be not the case.
Whatever happens, the world's future population
will be tilted more towards the Global South
and South Asia in particular.
In 2060, the three successor states
to pre-independence India
will have 2.3 billion people
versus China's 1.2 billion, guaranteeing profound changes
to the global economy.
(pensive music)